Welcome to the second lesson
in the mission planning module.
In this lesson we'll modify
our unweighted graph,
from the previous lesson
to contain edge weights.
To give a more applicable
representation
for our mission planning problem.
We'll then discuss how it
impacts our algorithm,
and how we can overcome
this challenge while still
planning efficiently.
In particular by the
end of this video,
you should be able to understand
the difference between
weighted and unweighted graphs,
and why weighted graphs are
more useful for mission planning.
You should have a firm grasp
of the Dijkstra's algorithm.
A graph search algorithm
that is useful for
weighted graphs.
Let's get started.
As a refresher, recall that
for our mission planning problem,
the goal is to find
the optimal path in
our road network from the ego
vehicles current position,
to the required
final destination.
In the last video
we presented the
breadth-first search algorithm
to solve this problem.
However, in the process
we assume that
all road segments
have equal length,
which is an overly
simplistic assumption.
Depending on factors such as
road lengths, traffic,
speed limits,
and weather, different
road segments
can vary wildly in
their traversal costs.
For simplicity, we
will initially focus
purely on distance
in our search graph.
To reflect this, we will add
edge weights to
each edge in the graph,
that correspond to the length
of the corresponding
road segment.
This is shown here,
after updating
our unweighted graph
with appropriate edge weights.
The units of the weights
are arbitrary,
as long as they are
common to all edges.
For this instance, suppose
the edge weights
are the number of
kilometers it takes to travel
across that road segment.
As before, the goal is to
find the optimal path
from the vertex of
the ego vehicles
current position S to
the final destination
vertex T. Unfortunately,
our BFS algorithm doesn't
take edge weights
into consideration.
So it isn't guaranteed to find
the optimal path
in this situation.
We instead need to use
a different more
powerful algorithm.
This is where Dijkstra's
algorithm comes in.
Edsger Dijkstra, a Dutch
computer scientist,
first conceived of
this algorithm in 1956.
In an interview in 2001,
he explains that he was
shopping with
his fiance at the time,
and got tired and they
sat down for a coffee.
He had been puzzling
with the shortest
path problem in his head,
and within 20 minutes
he worked out
his algorithm without
pen or paper.
It took him three more years to
write a paper on this topic,
but he credits the simplicity
and elegance of
the idea with being forced to
work through the solution
entirely in his head.
The overall flow of
Dijkstra's algorithm
is quite similar to BFS.
The main difference is in
the order we process
the vertices.
We've highlighted
the differences from
the BFS algorithm in blue.
As before, we keep track
of the vertices we
have already processed
in the closed set,
and the vertices
we've discovered but
not yet processed
in the open set.
The key difference
is that instead
of using a queue
for the open set,
we'll be using a min heap.
A min heap is
a data structure that
stores keys and values,
and sorts the keys in terms of
their associated values
from smallest to largest.
In our case, the values of
each key vertex in the graph
will correspond to
the distance it
takes to reach that vertex,
along the shortest path to
that vertex we've found so far.
In this sense, Dijkstra's
algorithm processes
vertices with a lower accumulated
cost before other ones.
Thus unlike BFS, a vertex
that was added later
in the search can be processed
before when that
was added earlier,
so long as it's accumulated
cost is lower.
Other than that,
Dijkstra's algorithm is
largely the same as BFS.
Progressing through the vertices,
while adding and
popping them off of
the min heap until
the goal vertex is processed.
One interesting case however,
is if we find a new path
to a vertex that is
already in the open heap but
has not been processed yet.
In this case, we have to
check if the newly found path
to this vertex is cheaper
than the old path.
If it is, we need to update
its cost in the
min-heap otherwise,
no action is required.
Once we process the goal vertex
we must have necessarily
processed all
possible predecessor
vertices of the goal node.
Since a predecessor
must have accumulated
distance less than or
equal to the goal vertex.
Since all predecessor vertices
have been processed,
we will have found the shortest
path to the goal vertex.
Once the goal vertex
has been processed,
so the algorithm can terminate.
To solidify our understanding,
let's step through
the application of
Dijkstra's algorithm to
our new weighted graph.
For our graph as with BFS,
the first vertex to process is S,
which then adds A,
B and C, to the min heap.
By default, the accumulated
cost of the origin S is zero.
So the cost to reach A, B and C,
is five, seven and
two respectively.
Since we are using a min-heap
instead of a queue for
Dijkstra's algorithm,
the order of
the open vertices is now
CAB sorted from lowest cost
to highest cost in the heap.
We store each of these
vertices predecessors as S,
and then add S to the closed set.
Next, we pop C from the heap.
Since it is the lowest
cost vertex so far.
C is only connected to E,
which has not yet
been discovered.
So we add it to the min heap with
a cost of two plus eight is ten,
along with C as its predecessor.
Our new heap ordering is A,
B and E. We then add
C to the closed set.
The next vertex to pop
off the heap is A,
which connects to both D and B.
D is not yet been explored,
so we add it to the heap with
a cost of five plus
two for seven,
and b however has
been explored as it
currently has an accumulated
cost of seven.
The edge AB has weight one,
so the new cost of going through
A is five plus one for six.
Since this is lower than
the current cost of
B which was seven,
we update the cost of
B in the heap to six,
and change its
predecessor from S to A.
To show that the cost
of B was updated,
we have marked the new edge
to be as purple.
We then close vertex A.
Our vertex ordering in
the min heap is now B,
D and E. We now pop
B off of the heap,
which only connects to E.
The cost so far to
reach B is six,
which gives us a cost
of nine to reach
E. E was already
stored in the min heap
with a cost of ten.
So, we need to update
the cost of E to nine,
as well as change
its predecessor from C to B.
Finally, we close vertex B.
Our new vertex ordering
in the min-heap is
D then E. Next,
we pop D off of the heap
which connects both E and
T. E is already in
the heap with cost nine,
and the new path from D
to E has a cost of 14.
Since this is higher
than E's current cost,
we can ignore this new path.
To show that we've ignored it,
we mark the new edge to E
as red instead of purple.
We then add T to the heap of
a cost of seven
plus one is eight,
setting D as its predecessor.
Finally, we close vertex D.
Our new heap ordering is
T and then E. The final vertex
that we pop off is T,
which is our goal vertex.
This completes
the planning process,
and we now have an optimal path
formed by chaining
together the predecessors of
T all the way back to the origin,
as highlighted on
this graph here.
Next, let's take a look at how
this mission planning problem
looks on a real map.
Here we have a map of
Berkeley, California.
Where the vertices of
the graph correspond
to intersections, and
the edges correspond to
road segments as we
discussed earlier.
The two red dots,
correspond to the start and end
points of our required plan.
We have to remember that
certain roads are one-way roads.
As such, the graph is directed.
After running
Dijkstra's algorithm,
the shortest path between
the two nodes is given
by the red path.
Dijkstra's algorithm
is quite efficient,
which allows it to
scale really well to
real-world problems such
as the ones shown here.
In fact, it even works with
a much larger scale problems such
as navigating over New York City.
Whose road network graph
is shown below.
While Dijkstra's is
an efficient algorithm,
we can leverage
certain heuristics to
make it even faster in practice,
which we'll discuss
in our next lesson.
Now that we've worked
through a full example,
let's review what we
discussed in this video.
We first introduced the concept
of a weighted graph,
and discussed that having
the ability to make
certain edges have
higher weights than others,
better reflects the
autonomous driving mission.
As different roads are
longer than others.
As a consequence of this,
our breadth-first search
algorithm no longer works.
So we introduced
Dijkstra's algorithm,
to handle this added complexity.
In our next lesson,
we'll be discussing how
to solve these problems
more efficiently using
search heuristics.
We'll introduce
the A-star algorithm.